this program is presented by University
of California television like what you
learn visit our website or follow us on
Facebook and Twitter to keep up with the
latest uctv
programs
[Music]
we have uh joining us um sidartha mukari
and hopefully he will pop up here on the
panel there he is uh you know I I did
not uh know until a few minutes ago that
we were going to have um uh this
fantastic and important pullit Sur prise
winning author um sidartha Mukerji uh on
screen I thought he was going to be with
me on stage so I rushed as as many of
you know we have a little bookstore here
uh with people with the books of the
scholars the scientists the social
phenoms like d Pac choer and others um
all of those books are over there so I
went over and I grabbed the book uh I
paid for this book uh which I rarely do
anymore the Emperor of all maladies a
biography of cancer uh this book is
arguably the most important book on
cancer uh that has been written in this
era and we're so pleased to have uh the
author with us he's collaborating with
Ken Burns uh in producing a PBS
documentary uh on the history of cancer
the biography of cancer and so he's here
with us uh to have a discussion a
dialogue and and yeah great
greetings s artha hi Hi how are you how
are you
so good good good to see you uh so can
you talk can you basically the the the
the book you've done which is uh won so
many awards is is is the definitive
account of essentially the history of
cancer from the beginning of of of our
recorded uh encounters with it to the
present can you share with us a little
bit about what drove you to do this you
are an assistant doctor of medicine at
at at Columbia University but you you
you know are now a prize-winning author
so please share with us how you got into
this and what you've learned uh well you
know the the impetus for the book um was
really a question that a patient had
asked me while I was uh trying to treat
her uh several years ago she said I I
I'm willing to go on with my next cycle
of treatment but I need to know what it
is that I'm fighting it's a very simple
question I need to know what it is that
I'm fighting and and I was astounded by
the the fact that here we are running a
a presumably massive human campaign
against cancer on every front the
political front the scientific front
from basic research spanning to uh
advocacy in Washington and yet we lacked
a kind of uh a Manifesto if you will or
a description A History A Story of what
it what what what was this all about uh
where had this started is it old is it
new what happens next where are we in it
are we in the middle are we to the end
um and so you know in in some ways I I
wrote the book back to this this patient
that I was treating but also I I wrote
it for myself I I was as if I needed my
own road map um and a public road map to
where we were and what what was
happening next you know I I've you
enjoyed jumping around in the book uh
this morning and and looking at but it
occurs to me that you know of of of all
presidents Richard Nixon was actually
the one to formally declare a war on
cancer uh in the early 1970s how would
you should as you know love to declare
Wars on many things yeah the wars yeah
there is war on many
things I was the first director of the
Nixon Center so I try to mention Nixon
in every event I do uh but but I think
that you know one of one of the
questions would be interesting for you
to handicap is how has our war on cancer
how's our progress if any uh developed
since then and how do you look at this
time time of just we're in UC San Diego
astounding Revolutions in science and
Computing capacity and uh uh our
understanding of genes do you think
we're at fundamentally a different
moment that if that war were relaunched
today we would be uh in a different
space well I think the war war metaphor
is a complicated metaphor so let's dwell
on that for a second um I think uh you
know several people have pointed out
that you know
you the idea of the war wars are won or
lost um scientific battles are not won
or lost they're solved or or or yet
unsolved so there's a fundamental
conflict with the idea of declaring war
on you know it's like saying I'm I'm
declaring war on a puzzle you don't
declare war on a puzzle you either solve
it or you leave it unsolved or you try
to solve it so um you know and and and
so so now now turning the metaphor over
to the the metaphor of puzzle I think
we're somewhere in the middle of that
puzzle um we have learned an enormous
amount from the uh the Revolutions in
biology in particular the revolution of
genomics and the capacity to detect all
the genetic alterations in various
cancers number one we've realized that
cancer is not one disease but many
diseases that in fact even what we call
breast cancer is a whole bunch of
diseases that actually are somewhat
similar but also somewhat different
under the genetic microscope and so that
allows us now to have the fundamental
landscape as it were or the territory
on which if you want to persist on on
the Met War the war will be fought so in
other words we now know what the
territory looks like it's still I think
a long way from finding out what to do
about these genes how do you now use
this information to try to make
therapies that don't just recapitulate
the problems of the past the uh you know
the somewhat effective but largely
ineffective chemotherapies the somewhat
effective surgeries the somewhat
effective radiation therapy how do you
take all this uh information from the
past and make it information about the
future I mean the bottom line is that I
think we're in the middle uh we're in
the middle and it's an important middle
Wars don't don't get transformed puzzles
don't get solved without going through
the middle you have to go through it and
that's where we are and we need the
energy we need the the the scientific
energy the the Creative Energy the
energy from the information systems um
to be able to solve the next series of
important questions in this puzzle you
know the Atlantic has hosted quite a
number of U healthc care and and and
health um Innovation forums and one of
the things that comes out particularly
with regard to how I've looked at your
book real quickly your book tells and
links together many case studies many
human stories uh history of this disease
looks at uh cuttingedge science and it
and it creates a really a magnificent
narrative on on this disease but the
truly magnificent narrative exists out
there in the in the health records of
people that have suffered with this the
many millions who who are living with uh
cancer or who have died who've had
various treatments and so one of the the
the revolutions cing today is the Big
Data Revolution and one of the questions
that has styed somewhat those who would
like to look in the case studies of all
of this and look in the aggregate at
everyone is uh concerns about privacy do
you think that's a gap that can be
jumped over how do you respond when when
as a as a scientist as a uh uh uh you
know in in medicine thinking about here
you've got the availability of you to to
to take your book and multip Supply it
by a million given everything out there
and and yet we've got a lot of
resistance basically on the Privacy
front well I'm going to say two things
the first thing is that it's very
important as a scientist not to confuse
Big Data with smart data they're not the
same thing in fact very small pieces of
data can be vastly more informative than
very large pieces of data so there's a
kind of fetishism of big data which I
don't I actually don't subscribe to I'm
not interested in it I'm interested in
in data that's intelligent in data that
really provides answers to questions and
it's not necessarily Big Data small
experiments can can generate huge
results I mean you know an apple falling
from a tree on your head can be much
more important than 50 pieces you know
50,000 uh pixels of uh of nonsense
information on on Facebook say so so I
think we need to discriminate between
those two things so the real question is
how do we make smart data available and
to what extent does really smart data
impinge on PRI on questions like privacy
and on questions like what what needs to
be uh you know what needs to be kept
information that needs to be kept
conserved in a way in in a private space
you know to be perfectly honest I I
really don't see a big conflict here I
mean I think the I think there is plenty
of space for the anonymization of
information such that the information
does not impinge on on deeply private
information uh I think what we're trying
to do in cancer is to extract from Big
Data smart data how do you take genomic
information of not one individual but
thousands of individuals and create
medicines that are that are that are
better targeted that have less toxicity
that lengthen life with with fewer side
effects and it's not it's far from clear
to me that the biggest challenge there
is privacy it's just not um there's a
lot of there's a lot of movement as it
were in in the in the in the
conservation of privacy around the idea
of data and it's useful in helpful but I
would put it to you that that is not the
biggest scientific problem facing cancer
research researchers today the biggest
scientific problem facing cancer
research today is how to take data which
is very complex it's multi-dimensional
it's very big and to convert it into
things that are usable I mean can you
use the information from the genome can
you use the information about Lifestyles
to convert it into prevention is to
convert to identify carcinogens that we
don't know about to wa to make new drugs
happen that Target targets in the cell
in in the in molecular targets that
haven't been previously exploited do you
think there are means and methods of
doing just what you said needs to happen
that that are that are emerging oh
absolutely absolutely but I think it has
to be married to uh what I call real
biology and real medicine so in other
words you know it is not clear to me
that the data Revolution is going to
solve the cancer problem it will provide
part of the solution to the cancer
problem because cancer is a complex
disase disease but it's not the only
solution to the cancer problem it has to
be an integrated or longitudinal
solution um for instance you know you
don't need big data to tell us that
cigarette smoking is a major cause of
lung cancer around the world today which
it is uh what you do need is a mechanism
in country in developing countries for
instance to stop young people from
smoking that is not that is not a data
problem it is a problem about the way we
deploy data the way we understand social
networks it's again it's it's I I'd like
to discriminate between big data and
between smart data you might have a
single intervention might be successful
in transforming the prevention of lung
cancer in developing countries now where
does that information come come from it
might come from the extraction of
information from very complex social
networks or it might be an advertising
campaign that is actually based on
something that was done in the 1950s so
again just to emphasize the point let's
not confuse big with smart great that's
a great point you write in your book um
section I I I love this uh section the
philosopher of science Carl popper
coined the term risky prediction to
describe the process by which scientists
verify untested theories good theories
poer proposed generate risky predictions
they presage an unanticipated fact or
event that runs a real risk of not
occurring or being proven incorrect when
this unanticipated fact proves true or
the event does occur the theory gain
credibility and robustness and then
through this chapter you talk somewhat
historically looking back at those
people who made uh risky assessments
that began to kind of help fill out uh
our understanding of the story and
history of cancer and I'm interested
given your all the narratives that youve
swn into this and and and and your um
your profound knowledge now of how we've
evolved today looking forward how do you
uh see what the the risky prediction
what are the risky predictions that we
would posit from this time in 2013 that
might be the ones to challenge our own
uh understanding and and Paradigm of
thinking about cancer so these are it's
an it's a it's a deeply important
question you're asking and so let me
propose some risky predictions and I
encourage people in the in the audience
actually think about their own risky
predictions because this is how science
moves ahead so in other words what's a
risky prediction a risky prediction is
something is a hypothesis that runs a
real tangible risk of failing to be true
in other words it's very easy easy to
come up with hypotheses that are likely
to be true right the the the and as as
poer and others have pointed out the the
real the the real driving force of much
of science is to is to put your neck out
there and to make a prediction that is
truly that truly runs the likely to be
not proven true and thereby proves or
disproves Theory this goes back to the
idea that popper had of of the idea of
falsifiability which is that you know
theories are only useful if they're
truly falsifiable if you propose a
Theory you have to be able to propose an
argument or an experiment that will
disprove the theory and just to give you
one example to fill this out me you know
you can't say uh you know you can't say
for instance you can't say you you know
alternative medicine really works in
cancer but unfortunately using your
metrics I'm afraid you won't ever be
able to prove it right so that's a
theory that does not have a risky
prediction because essentially you've
taken the risk out of the you've said
there's no way you can prove or
disproven so let me give you some
examples of some risk number one deep
genomic annotation of cancer that means
sequencing cancers at a very deep
genetic level is going to have a
transformative impact on cancer medicine
and prevention that's a risky that's a
risky proposition in other words you're
saying that big information about all
the genetic mutations that cancer has
will in the end provide new mechanisms
of treatment cure and prevention of
cancer we don't know this yet uh we
would like to believe it's true because
we've invested a huge amount of
resources scientific person Personnel um
and political resources into the cancer
Genome Project and the question is what
are the dividends of that project will
it really transform into true new
medicines appearing in the Horizon so
that's Point number one here's another
risky prediction the understanding of
the immune system and its relationship
to cancer will provide a new set of
Diagnostic and therapeutic tools in the
future maybe it's true in fact we're
beginning to see the first few amazing
new uh Cancer drugs that specifically
Target the immune system activate it and
make it active against cancer cells but
we don't know if these will really
ultimately become common are these
common targets are these uncommon
targets is it true for all cancers not
true for all cancers that's a big
question here's a risky prediction
number three combinations of of
therapies that are targeted against
particular genes or genetic Pathways if
you combine them you all of a sudden
will get synergistic and huge effects
that single therapies don't have in
themselves it's a risky prediction we
don't know if that's true or not we know
in general that combination chemotherapy
which kills cancer cells relatively
indiscriminately can have a huge effect
impact on some cancers but on other
cancers it's not very effective so is it
true that targeting multiple Pathways
using much more these novel uh these
novel uh Therapeutics will have a series
of impacts on on cancer I'll give you
one last example and this is a political
example um altering the structure the
way we perform cancer research currently
which is based on a on a model of of
academic research being translated by
translational Physicians and ultimately
by pharmaceutical the pharmaceutical
industry in a kind of linear manner uh
will produce the next generation of
cancer prevention and Therapeutics now
you could say Well it generates a risky
prediction are there other models out
there that would actually work better
could there be a more Superior model
that produces more transformative impact
on cancer therapy in the near future so
these I I you know that's just a
spectrum and I could go on I could give
you tens of thousands of probably know
thousands I I would say dozens of
examples of truly risky predictions that
expand the gamut from basic science to
the political organization of cancer
research I I think that kind of list is
really vital uh in part giving people an
on-ramp to understand what the Cutting
Edge of thinking in this area is doing
so such a list is is is such a valuable
thing your book is not only Steve let me
pause for a second who do you think
should generate that list well who who
is in the who is in the position is it
is it a public responsibility is it
could it be is that list to be
crowdsourced does it require does it
require a public conversation if so who
is having that public conversation how's
that public conversation being funded I
mean we understand the importance of the
problem you know one and three if not
one in four if not one in two men and
women will be afflicted by cancer in
their lifetimes in the United States one
and four men and women will die of
cancer this is your problem this is my
problem this is our children's problem
this is our parents problem so where are
we where what are the mechanisms of
having this conversation who is having
it um and what who are the critics of
this conversation who who who is
surveying and scrutinizing this
conversation uh great question I think
that the the followup I was going to
have on that was that as you your book
is not just a story of cancer it's
really a story of society and how it's
mobilized to think about it and deal
with it and one of the interesting
questions I have today particularly what
we see going on with Washington
Washington is not the Beall in this but
we're at a you know worldclass research
facility here you work in a world-class
uh uh hospital and and research
University yourself and in this when you
look at the ecosystem that's been uh
developed over time the stakeholders the
innovators the scientists the funders
you know the by do act which gave
universities a stake in advancement uh
of Science and economic incentive I'm
interested in and how someone CU you you
know this world much better than I do
how would you say we're doing in terms
of building a a stronger ecosystem and
do you see that an ecosystem of dealing
with this question and do you see it
enhanced by what's going on now and we
we can either talk about Washington or
not or do you see some of the key
elements of that social uh stakeholding
in this uh being undermined well I'm
happy to talk about Washington although
I'm Al it's a depressing conversation so
you
know uh the the the it won't be my last
question end I think is that it's a
fragile ecosystem like all important
ecosystems we have to recognize it's a
fragile EOS system what you cannot do
and and and I've been to like you have
been in Washington several times what
you cannot do with cancer is you cannot
say or with any scientific project you
can't say well you know we've run out of
money today so let's put it on hold for
five years and when the budgets creep up
when the time happens we we'll come back
to it um that just doesn't happen
science is a continuous conversation and
if it breaks it's a broken conversation
um so it is not as if you can all of a
sudden say well let's put it on let's
put the cancer genome on hold for the
next five years and when we come up with
when we come up with the right set of
tools we can come back to the
conversation because that conversation
will cease to happen um there are people
who engage who are deeply engaged in the
conversation right now and that includes
scientists epidemiologists nurses uh
advocates patients uh their loved ones
their families and it is a continuous
convers it's happening right now it's a
fragile conversation because it can be
broken by uh if you cease to H have it
then you know it will forget and and in
fact you have to build it up right from
scratch so and there are institutions
National institutions that have spent
their entire lifeblood as it were to
keeping this conversation happening the
national care Institute the National
Institutes of Health um so if it is a it
is a peculiarity of this ecosystem that
that while it produces Rich dividends on
one hand it's actually very fragile and
it can be very quickly har harmed by you
know take away a few of these critical
pieces and the whole thing comes
toppling down uh just before I move to
the uh audience for questions I guess my
last question is is about the
documentary The three-part uh sixh hour
uh PBS series that you were doing based
on uh the Emperor of all
maladies there's a way I love the way
you framed that this is really a
Chronicle of us it's a Chronicle of of
people in their lives force you to look
at it but but what I see your book doing
and the discussion we've had today is
really uh one to inspire or to drive you
know collaboration to kind of continue
to to to work on this so what how are
you and Ken Burns thinking of organizing
the series and and and what is your
ultimate objective uh with with the
series on cancer well the ultimate
objective is to start a national
conversation about cancer and through
that started National conversation about
science and through that started
National conversation about the the
relationship between Society illness
medicine and science um that is a it's a
large goal but I think cancer itself is
a phenomenon that involves us all so
therefore is the is I think the
appropriate substrate to have that
conversation um I mean the way that
we're doing it is that we're we're
trying to tell stories um I think of it
I think of myself I think of scientists
as storytellers I think of Physicians as
storytellers and I think of myself as
one of the many storytellers in this
process I think it is a it is a story it
is our story uh it is a story because it
is something that affects each and every
one of our Lives I mean I mean if you
look at Ken's films um you know Civil
War Jazz baseball um Civil War is a film
about the Civil War but it's really a
it's a film about our contemporary story
today baseball is a film about baseball
but it really is about as the story of
aspiration and tragedy of aspirations
you know jazz is a story about music but
it's also a story about race and its
consequences in the United States so in
some ways uh cancer I I think will be a
story about cancer but it will be a
story about much larger themes um
Wellness illness Norm normaly abnormaly
uh what it means to be uh a society
where uh you know as I said one in three
or one in four people will be affected
by this illness and how we deal with it
historically becomes a fundamentally
American story thank you let me open to
the audience we've got time for a couple
of questions you let me take this
gentleman
here good morning Dr mukaj Daniel Simon
from Onyx Pharmaceuticals hi Dan if you
look at the difference in cancer
outcomes across countries across States
hospitals and indeed individual
Physicians it would seem that one of the
biggest improvements today in oncology
outcomes would be to get all Physicians
to adhere to best practice as we
understand it today how should we think
about actually making that happen so the
question is I mean how how should we how
should we create best practices or how
should we make Physicians adhere to best
practices because they're two different
things adhere to best practices and
adopt them um so so the first the first
part of the question is I mean how do we
create best practices uh are how is
there is there a mechanism to create
best practice so here it comes back to a
risky prediction right the risky
prediction here which you know I think
is is worthwhile thinking about is can
one create a a a series of best
practices such that when you go to your
physician you know in in in the United
States in the United Kingdom wherever
you're being wherever you're being
treated that you know that you're
undergoing the best practice treatment
and then uh the alternative is a
clinical trial that moves that best
practice in some ways now the reason I'm
saying this is very important because um
the the the re utions uh of new
Therapeutics will not be realized in
cancer medicine in adult cancer medicine
unless adults participate in trials and
adults will not participate in Trials
unless they're told that that what
they're being treated with is
state-of-the-art but has reached a kind
of plateau or a limit or a ceiling and
that the next level of knowledge
generation involves a clinical trial
right now we have about 10%
participation of adults in clinical
trials the number varies depending on
the disease but that's a dismal number
that's an abysmal number uh we cannot
undergo the next series of important
advances in cancer medicine without
involving at least 50 or 70% of patients
in developed countries in clinical
trials and maybe in in developing
countries as well so I I I fully agree
that there has to be a creation of a
best practice system that allows uh that
allows cancer medicine to move forward
let me make one other point clear which
is that a best practice system need not
be the not even be the most economic
practice system and we have to
discriminate between these two things
the the most cost-saving solution may
not be the best solution but we need to
have a conversation about which is the
better solution for us as a as a society
or a healthare system is is there an
intermediate point which saves cost or
is and is most effective for the amount
of cost given I think these
conversations are so vital and that the
fact that we're not having them instead
are spending our time talking about
nonsense in cancer you know how to how
to how to fund and how to move forward
the most basic science um because
because there there are there you
because because we cannot manage to fund
a basic National Cancer effort is really
is really depressing to me well just to
wrap up I just said arth I just want to
thank you for this book and thank you
for helping us to know our own Narrative
of something that that I think all of us
have been exposed to and think about um
that we experience in our lives and I
think it's uh such a great and valuable
contribution I really recommend everyone
we do have the book outside the Emperor
of vol mality so thank you so much for
this thank you so much and and you know
my my my last message is don't don't
don't let anyone convince you that this
is someone else's problem this is your
problem this is my problem it's a
national problem we need to solve it
thank you ladies and gentlemen to
[Applause]
AR
[Music]